docs/references/jito-tip-router.md, before:

# Jito Tip Router Program

## Overview

### Current Process

- Each validator has a unique tip distribution account, owned by the [Jito Tip Distribution Program], where SOL is collected for a given epoch.
- At the end of the epoch, an off-chain process takes place which produces a merkle tree and merkle root for each validator’s tip distribution account. 
    - Validators can run this process themselves or delegate it to another party.
    - The merkle tree is intended to distribute any SOL in the account to the validator based on their MEV commission rate. Remaining funds are sent to stakers’ stake accounts pro-rata.
- After the merkle root has been uploaded, merkle proofs are uploaded on-chain and the program will transfer SOL from the tip distribution account to the validator’s vote account and stake accounts. 

### Problem

- Merkle root upload authority is permissioned with opt-in from each Jito-Solana validator. This mechanism creates a single point of potential failure with adverse impacts on network stakeholders and lacks transparency on the calculation.

### Solution

The TipRouter NCN will leverage Jito (Re)staking to empower a set of node operators to come to consensus on the correct merkle root for tip distribution.

The mechanism of the TipRouter NCN is detailed below:

- Validators can delegate the merkle root upload authority to a program derived address owned by the NCN, giving it permission [to upload merkle roots].
- After epoch rollover, node operators will each compute the merkle tree and merkle root for each validator and upload it on-chain.

![](./images/cast_vote.png)

- On a periodic basis, consensus of node operators will be checked. After ⅔ of stake agrees on a merkle root for a given validator, a cross program invocation will take place to upload the merkle root to the validator’s tip distribution account.

![](./images/upload.png)

[Jito Tip Distribution Program]: https://github.com/jito-foundation/jito-programs/blob/master/mev-programs/programs/tip-distribution/src/lib.rs
[to upload merkle roots]: https://github.com/jito-foundation/jito-tip-router/blob/022fee74773170b76d1f8aad8c8edc71fd387e05/program/src/set_merkle_root.rs#L61-L80

## NCN Program

Following the [NCN design section], Jito Tip Router consists of:

- Pricing
- Snapshot
- Core Logic
- Reward Payment


[NCN design section]: /guide/ncn-design.md

### Weight Table

**Permissionless Cranker**:

Prepare several accounts like `TrackedMints` and `WeightTable`.

- [Initialize TrackedMints account](https://github.com/jito-foundation/jito-tip-router/blob/master/program/src/initialize_tracked_mints.rs)
- [Register Mint](https://github.com/jito-foundation/jito-tip-router/blob/master/program/src/register_mint.rs)
- [Initialize WeightTable account](https://github.com/jito-foundation/jito-tip-router/blob/master/program/src/initialize_weight_table.rs)

**NCN Admin**:

NCN admin update *weight* of supported token on Tip Router NCN.

- [Update WeightTable account](https://github.com/jito-foundation/jito-tip-router/blob/master/program/src/admin_update_weight_table.rs)

### Operator + Vault Snapshots

Take snapshots of Operator and Vault per epoch.

**Permissionless Cranker**:

Aggregate all information of operators and vaults associated with NCN

- [Initialize EpochSnapshot account](https://github.com/jito-foundation/jito-tip-router/blob/master/program/src/initialize_epoch_snapshot.rs)
- [Initiazize OperatorSnapshot account](https://github.com/jito-foundation/jito-tip-router/blob/master/program/src/initialize_operator_snapshot.rs)

### Consensus

**Permissionless Cranker**:

Prepare Ballot Box, all votes would be collected here.

- [Initialize Ballot Box](https://github.com/jito-foundation/jito-tip-router/blob/master/program/src/initialize_ballot_box.rs)

After consensus reached with more than 2/3, cranker can upload the merkle tree of each validator.

- [Set Merkle Root](https://github.com/jito-foundation/jito-tip-router/blob/master/program/src/set_merkle_root.rs)

**Operator**:

Each operator caluclate the merkle tree to produce merkle root then cast vote with produced merkle root.

- [Cast Vote](https://github.com/jito-foundation/jito-tip-router/blob/master/program/src/cast_vote.rs)

### Distribute Rewards

IN PROGRESS

## References
- [JIP-8: Adopt TipRouter NCN (Protocol Development)](https://forum.jito.network/t/jip-8-adopt-tiprouter-ncn-protocol-development/413)
- [Jito Tip Router Repo](https://github.com/jito-foundation/jito-tip-router/tree/master)

Commit message:

Docs: Tip Router (#14)
* fix: voting

* fix: update

* fix: update

docs/references/jito-tip-router.md, after:

# Jito Tip Router Program

## Overview

### Current Process

- Each validator has a unique tip distribution account, owned by the [Jito Tip Distribution Program], where SOL is collected for a given epoch.
- At the end of the epoch, an off-chain process takes place which produces a merkle tree and merkle root for each validator’s tip distribution account. 
    - Validators can run this process themselves or delegate it to another party.
    - The merkle tree is intended to distribute any SOL in the account to the validator based on their MEV commission rate. Remaining funds are sent to stakers’ stake accounts pro-rata.
- After the merkle root has been uploaded, merkle proofs are uploaded on-chain and the program will transfer SOL from the tip distribution account to the validator’s vote account and stake accounts. 

### Problem

- Merkle root upload authority is permissioned with opt-in from each Jito-Solana validator. This mechanism creates a single point of potential failure with adverse impacts on network stakeholders and lacks transparency on the calculation.

### Solution

The TipRouter NCN will leverage Jito (Re)staking to empower a set of node operators to come to consensus on the correct merkle root for tip distribution.

The mechanism of the TipRouter NCN is detailed below:

- Validators can delegate the merkle root upload authority to a program derived address owned by the NCN, giving it permission [to upload merkle roots].
- After the epoch rollover, node operators will compute a 'meta merkle root' — a merkle root derived from a new merkle tree containing all validator merkle trees — and upload it on-chain. This change reduces the number of votes required, as operators now vote on the meta merkle root instead of casting individual votes for each validator.

![](./images/cast_vote.png)

::: tip

Inside of Stake Meta:

- validator_vote_account: The account representing the validator's voting authority.
- validator_node_pubkey: The public key of the validator node.
- maybe_tip_distribution_meta: Metadata related to tip distribution, if applicable.
    - merkle_root_upload_authority: The authority responsible for uploading the merkle root.
    - tip_distribution_pubkey: The pulic key owned by the Jito Tip Distribution Program.
    - total_tips: The total amount of tips in the [`TipDistributionAccount`]
    - validator_fee_bps: The validator's cut of tips from [`TipDistributionAccount`], calculated from the on-chain commission fee bps.
- delegations: Delegations to this validator.
    - stake_account_pubkey: The public key of the stake account.
    - staker_pubkey: The public key of the staker.
    - withdrawer_pubkey: The public key authorized to withdraw from the stake account.
    - lamports_delegated: Lamports delegated by the stake account
- total_delegated: The total amount of delegations to the validator.
- commission: The validator's delegation commission rate as a percentage between 0-100.

  :::

- After each vote, consensus of node operators will be checked. After ⅔ of stake agrees on a merkle root for a given validator, a cross program invocation will take place to upload the merkle root to the validator’s tip distribution account.
- Operators can change their vote until consensus is reached, then they can not change their vote. Once consensus is reached, any operators who have not voted have a fixed window of slots to submit their vote in order to be eligible for rewards.

![](./images/upload.png)

[Jito Tip Distribution Program]: https://github.com/jito-foundation/jito-programs/blob/master/mev-programs/programs/tip-distribution/src/lib.rs
[to upload merkle roots]: https://github.com/jito-foundation/jito-tip-router/blob/022fee74773170b76d1f8aad8c8edc71fd387e05/program/src/set_merkle_root.rs#L61-L80
[`TipDistributionAccount`]: https://github.com/jito-foundation/jito-programs/blob/6bf84c19db9208a16e226074c666c965f5429d88/mev-programs/programs/tip-distribution/src/state.rs#L29-L54

## NCN Program

Following the [NCN design section], Jito Tip Router consists of:

- Pricing
- Snapshot
- Core Logic
- Reward Payment


[NCN design section]: /guide/ncn-design.md

### Pricing

**Permissionless Cranker**:

Prepare several accounts like `TrackedMints` and `WeightTable`.

- [Initialize TrackedMints account](https://github.com/jito-foundation/jito-tip-router/blob/master/program/src/initialize_tracked_mints.rs)
- [Register Mint](https://github.com/jito-foundation/jito-tip-router/blob/master/program/src/register_mint.rs)
- [Initialize WeightTable account](https://github.com/jito-foundation/jito-tip-router/blob/master/program/src/initialize_weight_table.rs)

**NCN Admin**:

NCN admin update *weight* of supported token on Tip Router NCN.

- [Update WeightTable account](https://github.com/jito-foundation/jito-tip-router/blob/master/program/src/admin_update_weight_table.rs)

### Snapshots (Operator + Vault)

Take snapshots of Operator and Vault per epoch.

**Permissionless Cranker**:

Aggregate all information of operators and vaults associated with NCN

- [Initialize EpochSnapshot account](https://github.com/jito-foundation/jito-tip-router/blob/master/program/src/initialize_epoch_snapshot.rs)
- [Initiazize OperatorSnapshot account](https://github.com/jito-foundation/jito-tip-router/blob/master/program/src/initialize_operator_snapshot.rs)

### Core Logic (Consensus)

**Permissionless Cranker**:

Prepare Ballot Box, all votes would be collected here.

- [Initialize Ballot Box](https://github.com/jito-foundation/jito-tip-router/blob/master/program/src/initialize_ballot_box.rs)

After consensus reached with more than 2/3, cranker can upload the merkle tree of each validator.

- [Set Merkle Root](https://github.com/jito-foundation/jito-tip-router/blob/master/program/src/set_merkle_root.rs)

**Operator**:

Each operator caluclate the merkle tree to produce merkle root then cast vote with produced merkle root.

- [Cast Vote](https://github.com/jito-foundation/jito-tip-router/blob/master/program/src/cast_vote.rs)

### Reward Payment

IN PROGRESS

## References
- [JIP-8: Adopt TipRouter NCN (Protocol Development)](https://forum.jito.network/t/jip-8-adopt-tiprouter-ncn-protocol-development/413)
- [Jito Tip Router Repo](https://github.com/jito-foundation/jito-tip-router/tree/master)
